Feature: target clock speed measurement and calculation (#26)
blackmagic-debug/black-magic-org: hacking/target-clock-generation.md

# Target Clock Generation

The Black Magic Debug firmware generates a clock signal to the debug target for both JTAG and SWD
by bitbanging, timed to the other signals involved in ths bus to generate transactions and exchange

> data back and forth. The bitbanging routines are not perfect at this and so generate a signal with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
data. The bitbanging routines are not perfect at this and so generate a signal with
```
https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/exchange

an odd mark-to-space ratio and at different frequencies depending on which routine is in play.

> Due to of all of the above, this winds up requiring a very particular approach for measuring the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Due to all of the above, this winds up requiring a very particular approach for measuring the
```

clock frequency generated to produce a number to report to the user, to take clock speed requests

> and map them to delay loop iteration counts, internally called the *clock divider*, and represent them

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and map them to delay loop iteration counts, internally called the *clock divider*, and then represent them
```

in the firmware.

The aim of this page is to lay out the method used to derive these clock frequency numbers and the
analytical tools used to then generate a calibration for a platform's `platform.h` header to make the
reporting and interaction as usefully accurate as possible.

This method comes with a [LibreOffice workbook](../_assets/target-clk-gen/BMP_Frequency_Division.ods)

> that acts as a tool for computing the offset and division factors for computing `target_clk_divider`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that acts as a tool for calculating the offset and division factors for computing `target_clk_divider`
```
(repetition; see https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/calculate and https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/compute)

> in the firmware, which should be used to gather the measurements made and verify results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in the firmware, which should be used to gather the measurements and verify results.
```

BitMagic Basic. We start out with firmware compiled for the target probe that has, by modifying the remote
protocol implementation, been forced to use the `_no_delay` bitbanging routines and a matching BMDA with
which to run JTAG scans of a suitable target. Within this section we will be using the BitMagic Basic
logic analyser and PulseView to make measurements, and have just two lines of the JTAG bus tapped - TCK and TMS.

TMS is used to help navigate the capture and find the correct routines to measure, TCK is of course the
signal we want to measure. We use a 1% pre-trigger capture ratio, 24MHz sampling frequency and 100 million
samples per capture to ensure we get sufficient data.

To prepare the first (`_no_delay`) run, we co-opt the remote protocol by [editing remote.c](https://github.com/blackmagic-debug/blackmagic/blob/799a4088e6c98fcbd977d9c3f2036bef4ba1e9b6/src/remote.c#L272).
We do this by commenting out the referenced line and replacing it with `target_clk_divider = UINT32_MAX;`
which, by virtue of how the bitbanging routines are written, forces the _no_delay variants.

We then load the firmware onto the probe, arm the logic analyser capture, and run BMDA as

> `src/blackmagic -tjv 1`. This will perform a JTAG scan, which prints the results then exits.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`src/blackmagic -tjv 1`. This will perform a JTAG scan, which prints the results and then exits.
```

At the start of a JTAG scan run, BMD [reinitialises its JTAG subsystem](https://github.com/blackmagic-debug/blackmagic/blob/799a4088e6c98fcbd977d9c3f2036bef4ba1e9b6/src/target/jtag_scan.c#L89-L96).
When it does this, it sets TMS high, sets the jtag_proc structure back up, and then [runs a >50 pulse JTAG
reset and the ARM SWD-to-JTAG sequence](https://github.com/blackmagic-debug/blackmagic/blob/799a4088e6c98fcbd977d9c3f2036bef4ba1e9b6/src/platforms/common/jtagtap.c#L53-L55).

This then ensures the bus is in a good state while leaving TMS high after. We then perform an additional
JTAG reset when starting the ID code readout, along with having to switch into the Shift-DR JTAG TAP state. These
are the additional sets of pulses between the marked ones of interest. We finally do
[several 32-bit transactions](https://github.com/blackmagic-debug/blackmagic/blob/799a4088e6c98fcbd977d9c3f2036bef4ba1e9b6/src/target/jtag_scan.c#L171)
on the bus, with the goal of reading out ID codes. These are done with TMS low giving this distinctive signature
between TMS and TCK that we see in the capture.

### Making the measurements

> We make multiple measurements in each of the following steps due to the issue of jitter caused by the capture
> temporal resolution resulting in quantisation noise. That is, if we measure only one cycle, the value measured

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We make multiple measurements in each of the following steps due to jitter caused by the capture's
temporal resolution resulting in quantisation noise. That is, if we measure only one cycle, the value measured
```

may be off by a substantial enough factor that it introduces excessive error into subsequent calculations.

> We counter that by making several measurements of each section of pulses, and applying a standard average as this
> compensates for this capture jitter, improving the method's accuracy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We counter that by making several measurements of each section of pulses, and then applying a standard average to compensate for the capture's jitter.
```

(I think the last remark is redundant in light of the "we counter that")

![A detailed view of the first pulse section of interest](../_assets/target-clk-gen/first_pulse_train.png)

We start by zooming in on the first pulse section of interest, and then using measurement markers to make

> several (at least 10) single-period measurements of the clock pulses generated by jtagtap_next(), making

Reviewer: ```suggestion
several (at least 10) single-period measurements of the clock pulses generated by `jtagtap_next()`, making
```

notes of the results and how many of each value are observed. Add the result up and divide by the total number
of samples taken. Record the final result for later use.

> We then repeat for jtagtap_tms_seq(), making a record of the final result using the same multiple measurement

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We then repeat for `jtagtap_tms_seq()`, making a record of the final result using the same multiple measurement
```

and averaging method.

![A detailed view of the second pulse section of interst](../_assets/target-clk-gen/second_pulse_train.png)

Finally, we zoom back out, pan over and then zoomed back in on the second section of interest. We then repeat
the measurement protocol on this final set of pulses and make a record of the final result after averaging.

### Deducing the final TCK clock frequency

After following the measurement protocol outlined above, you will now have 3 values - a clock frequency achieved

> by jtagtap_next(), jtagtap_tms_seq() and jtagtap_tdi_tdo_seq().

Reviewer: ```suggestion
by `jtagtap_next()`, `jtagtap_tms_seq()`, and `jtagtap_tdi_tdo_seq()`.
```

It is tempting to take the fastest of these and say "that's the clock frequency!", but this would be misleading
to the user and especially when trying to make comparative measurements to other probes and the clock frequencies

> they achieve. So instead, for comparative accuracy, we must average between these 3 measurements.

Reviewer: Nitpick: I'm not sure if you meant here that you intend to compare probes' frequencies (comparative measurements) or, that you want to take measurements with a reproducible setup of different probes (comparable measurements).

Author: Technically, both. The direct intended meaning is comparing between different probes' frequencies, hence "comparative measurements" - please let us know if you think we should alter this wording or keep it the same.

Reviewer: *nod* Keep the former, please. Marking as fixed.

Simply adding the 3 values up and dividng by 3 provides a reasonable approximation of the achieved clock frequency
for BMP. With this done, using the workbook referenced in the introduction, note the final value in column
A of the workbook against the delay factor line you have measured.

### Additional measurements

> After following this guide to get a measurement of the _no_delay routines, which will act as a baseline for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After following this guide to get a measurement of the `_no_delay` routines, which will act as a baseline for
```

the highest achievable frequency output, we must then repeat with `target_clk_divider` set to the values
0 through 4 (for 5 sets of additional measurements to the `_no_delay` one).

These additional measurements provide the data required to perform a linear regression, and set the representation

> baseline when to apply the divider calculation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
baseline when calculating the divider.
```

Author: Apologies for the confusing wording - it seems we missed a 'for' here. We were aiming to talk about the subsequent measurements providing the baseline (comparison point) for when the divider calculation should be applied. Please let us know if you still think this change should be applied or if this works in your mind:

```suggestion
baseline for when to apply the divider calculation.
```

Reviewer: `for the divider calculation` would be a better alternative.

## Linear Regression

Having completed the measurement protocol a total of 6 times, the workbook will compute the period (in seconds) of

> the clock frequencies measured, offset those against the baseline divider measurement (`target_clk_divider` = 0),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the clock frequencies measured, offset those against the baseline divider measurement (`target_clk_divider = 0`),
```

and perform a linear regression on the results to generate a division factor. It will also calculate an offset
factor, in cell B12 of the sheet "Data", which serves to determine how much the division factor must be offset to make

> the calcuations all work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the calculations all work.
```

The firmware runs the linear equation `divider = (clk_divider + div_factor) * offset` and its rearrangement for

> `clk_divider` to map between target_clk_divider and frequency values as accurately as it reasonably can.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`clk_divider` to map between `target_clk_divider` and frequency values as accurately as it reasonably can.
```

> `divider` in these equations is the value the CPU clock frequency is divider by to map back to a clock frequency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`divider` in these equations is the value the CPU clock frequency is divided by, in order to map to the intended TCK clock frequency.
```

The final division factor is provided as an output in cell B9 of the sheet "Data".

## Writing the calibration for the platform

Having done all of the above, there are a series of simple `#define` statements that must be added to the platform's header. We will make reference to the native (BMP) platform as an example for this section.

The first thing that must be defined in the platform header, is [`BITBANG_CALIBRATED_FREQS`](https://github.com/blackmagic-debug/blackmagic/blob/799a4088e6c98fcbd977d9c3f2036bef4ba1e9b6/src/platforms/native/platform.h#L296)
which serves to inform the `platform_max_frequency_{get,set}` implementations that a calibration has been done and
not to use the old method this replaces.

With this defined, we must then define the frequency achieved by the `_no_delay` routines, and the maximum frequency
achieved by  the `_clk_delay` routines. This involves defining [`BITBANG_NO_DELAY_FREQ` and `BITBANG_0_DELAY_FREQ`](https://github.com/blackmagic-debug/blackmagic/blob/799a4088e6c98fcbd977d9c3f2036bef4ba1e9b6/src/platforms/native/platform.h#L305-L313C9)

> which are the measured frequency values expressed in Hz

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which are the measured frequency values expressed in Hz.
```

notes of the results and how many of each value are observed. Add the result up and divide by the total number
of samples taken. Record the final result for later use.

We then repeat for `jtagtap_tms_seq()`, making a record of the final result using the same multiple measurement
and averaging method.

![A detailed view of the second pulse section of interst](../_assets/target-clk-gen/second_pulse_train.png)

Finally, we zoom back out, pan over and then zoomed back in on the second section of interest. We then repeat
the measurement protocol on this final set of pulses and make a record of the final result after averaging.

### Deducing the final TCK clock frequency

After following the measurement protocol outlined above, you will now have 3 values - a clock frequency achieved
by `jtagtap_next()`, `jtagtap_tms_seq()`, and `jtagtap_tdi_tdo_seq()`.

It is tempting to take the fastest of these and say "that's the clock frequency!", but this would be misleading
to the user and especially when trying to make comparative measurements to other probes and the clock frequencies
they achieve. So instead, for comparative accuracy, we must average between these 3 measurements.

> Simply adding the 3 values up and dividng by 3 provides a reasonable approximation of the achieved clock frequency

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Simply adding the 3 values up and dividing by 3 provides a reasonable approximation of the achieved clock frequency
```

Author: We'll run that onto main as an extra commit
